docs: rewrite inputs/outputs section of Template Syntax and add example (#27685)
angular/angular: aio/content/guide/template-syntax.md

{@a inputs-outputs}

## `@Input()` and `@Output()` properties

> `@Input()` and `@Output()` let parent and child components share data with one

Author: Changed. :)

> another. The `@Input()` property is settable while the `@Output()` property is observable.

Reviewer: Would `writable` better than `settable` to align with ECMAScript term?

Author: Works for me. Done!

  <child-component></child-component>
</parent-component>

```

A child component such as `<child-component>`, is embedded
within a `<parent-component>` using the child selector.

`@Input` and `@Output` act as
the API, or application programming interface, of the child
component in that they allow the child to
communicate with the parent. Think of `@Input()` and `@Output()` like ports
or doorways&mdash;`@Input()` is the doorway into the component allowing data
to flow in while `@Output()` is the doorway out of the component, allowing the
child component to send data out.

Though `@Input()` and `@Output()` often appear together in apps, you can use
them separately. If the nested
component is such that its only use is to send data to its parent, you wouldn't
need an `@Input()`, only an `@Output()`.

{@ input}

## `@Input()`

Use the `@Input()` decorator in a child component to let Angular know
that a property in that component can receive its value from its parent component.
It helps to remember that the data flow is from the perspective of the
child component. So an `@Input()` allows data to be input _into_ the
child component from the parent component.

<figure>

>   <img src='generated/images/guide/inputs-outputs/input.gif' alt="Input data flow diagram">

Reviewer: Another quote style issue as well as other `<figure>`s (but less important as not exposed to user)

Author: ah thanks for catching these. I think I got them all.

The key takeaway is that to use a child component's property in a binding in a parent component&mdash;that is, what's
in square brackets&mdash;you must
decorate the property with `@Input` in the child component.

<div class="alert is-helpful">

#### `OnChanges` and `@Input`

To watch for changes on an `@Input()` property, use
`OnChanges`, one of Angular's [lifecycle hooks](guide/lifecycle-hooks#onchanges).
`OnChanges` is specifically designed to work with properties that have the
`@Input()` decorator. See the [`OnChanges`](guide/lifecycle-hooks#onchanges) section of the [Lifecycle Hooks](guide/lifecycle-hooks) guide for more details and examples.

</div>

{@ output}

## `@Output()`

Use the `@Output()` decorator in the child component to allow data to flow from
the child _out_ to the parent.

`@Output()` almost always returns an Angular [`EventEmitter`](api/core/EventEmitter) with values flowing out of the component as [events](#event-binding).

<figure>
  <img src='generated/images/guide/inputs-outputs/output.gif' alt="Output diagram">
</figure>

Just like with `@Input()`, you can use `@Output()`
on any property of the child component but its type must be

> an event.

Reviewer: `event` -> ``` `EventEmitter` ```?

Author: Ah yes, I like that better too. Thanks!

```

Next, still in the child, decorate a property with `@Output()` in the component class.
The following example `@Output()` is called `newItemEvent` and its type is
`EventEmitter`, which means it's an event.

```ts
    @Output() newItemEvent: EventEmitter<string> = new EventEmitter<string>();
```
The different parts of the above declaration are as follows:

* `@Output()`&mdash;a decorator function marking the property as a way for data to go from the child to the parent.
* `newItemEvent`&mdash;the name of the `@Output()`.
* `EventEmitter<string>`&mdash;the `@Output()`'s type.
* `new EventEmitter<string>()`&mdash;tells Angular to create a new event and that the data it emits is of type string. The type could be any type, such as `number`, `boolean`, and so on. For more information on `EventEmitter`, see the [EventEmitter API documentation](api/core/EventEmitter).

Next, create an `addNewItem()` method in the same component class:

```ts
export class ItemDetailComponent {
  @Output() newItemEvent: EventEmitter<string> = new EventEmitter<string>(); //same as above

  addNewItem(value:string) {
    this.newItemEvent.emit(value);

> }

Reviewer: Seems missing an end curly brace here

Author: Thanks for catching. It's just placeholder though as I have to add the docregions (the real code snippets from the example). Fixed it anyway as a reminder to myself.

{@a inputs-outputs}

## `@Input()` and `@Output()` properties

> `@Input()` and `@Output()` allow Angular to share data between the parent context and child directives. The `@Input()` property is writable while the `@Output()` property is observable.

Author: Fixed.

Here, the `<child-component>` selector, or child directive, is embedded
within a `<parent-component>`, which serves as the child's context.

`@Input()` and `@Output()` act as
the API, or application programming interface, of the child
component in that they allow the child to
communicate with the parent. Think of `@Input()` and `@Output()` like ports
or doorways&mdash;`@Input()` is the doorway into the component allowing data
to flow in while `@Output()` is the doorway out of the component, allowing the
child component to send data out.

This section about `@Input()` and `@Output()` has its own <live-example name="inputs-outputs"></live-example>. The following subsections highlight
key points in the sample app.

<div class="alert is-helpful">

#### `@Input()` and `@Output()` are independent

Though `@Input()` and `@Output()` often appear together in apps, you can use
them separately. If the nested
component is such that it only needs to send data to its parent, you wouldn't
need an `@Input()`, only an `@Output()`. The reverse is also true in that if the
child only needs to receive data from the parent, you'd only neeed `@Input()`.

</div>

{@a input}

## How to use `@Input()`

> Use the `@Input()` decorator in a child component to let Angular know

Author: Got it. Changed! :)

that a property in that component can receive its value from its parent component.
It helps to remember that the data flow is from the perspective of the
child component. So an `@Input()` allows data to be input _into_ the
child component from the parent component.

<figure>
  <img src="generated/images/guide/inputs-outputs/input.svg" alt="Input data flow diagram">
</figure>

> To use `@Input()`, you need to edit these parts of your app:

Author: Ah ok. Updated!

* The child component class and template
* The parent component class and template

### In the child

To use the `@Input()` decorator in a child component class, first import
`Input` and then decorate the property with `@Input()`:

<code-example path="inputs-outputs/src/app/item-detail/item-detail.component.ts" region="use-input" header="src/app/item-detail/item-detail.component.ts" linenums="false">
</code-example>

> In this case, `@Input()` decorates the property `item`, which has

Author: @gkalpak do you know if there's something I can do to keep `item` from turning into a link?

> In this case, `@Input()` decorates the property `item`, which has

Author: In an offline conversation, @gkalpak showed me this: 

`<code class="no-auto-link">item</code>`

And it works perfectly.

Filed issue and closed with solution: #30975

First, use the child's selector, here `<app-item-detail>`, as a directive within the
parent component template. Then, use [property binding](guide/template-syntax#property-binding)
to bind the property in the child to the property of the parent.

<code-example path="inputs-outputs/src/app/app.component.html" region="input-parent" header="src/app/app.component.html" linenums="false">
</code-example>

Next, in the parent component class, `app.component.ts`, designate a value for `currentItem`:

<code-example path="inputs-outputs/src/app/app.component.ts" region="parent-property" header="src/app/app.component.ts" linenums="false">
</code-example>

With `@Input()`, Angular passes the value for `currentItem` to the child so that `item` renders as `Television`.

The following diagram shows this structure:

<figure>
  <img src="generated/images/guide/inputs-outputs/input-diagram-target-source.svg" alt="Property binding diagram">
</figure>

The target in the square brackets, `[]`, is the property you decorate
with `@Input()` in the child component. The binding source, the part
to the right of the equal sign, is the data that the parent
component passes to the nested component.

> The key takeaway is that to use a child component's property in a binding in a parent component&mdash;that is, what's

Author: This is much better. Thank you!

in square brackets&mdash;you must
decorate the property with `@Input()` in the child component.

<div class="alert is-helpful">

#### `OnChanges` and `@Input()`

To watch for changes on an `@Input()` property, use
`OnChanges`, one of Angular's [lifecycle hooks](guide/lifecycle-hooks#onchanges).
`OnChanges` is specifically designed to work with properties that have the
`@Input()` decorator. See the [`OnChanges`](guide/lifecycle-hooks#onchanges) section of the [Lifecycle Hooks](guide/lifecycle-hooks) guide for more details and examples.

</div>

{@a output}

## How to use `@Output()`

Use the `@Output()` decorator in the child component to allow data to flow from
the child _out_ to the parent.

> `@Output()` almost always returns an Angular [`EventEmitter`](api/core/EventEmitter) with values flowing out of the component as [events](#event-binding).

Author: Got it. Done.

<figure>
  <img src="generated/images/guide/inputs-outputs/output.svg" alt="Output diagram">
</figure>

Just like with `@Input()`, you can use `@Output()`

> on any property of the child component but its type must be

Author: Got it. Fixed.

> `EventEmitter`.

Author: Changed "must" to "should". It gives the leeway you point out but sticks to the intention of the guide. Thanks!

`@Output()` marks a property in a child component as a doorway
through which data can travel from the child to the parent.
The child component then has to raise an event so the
parent knows something has changed. To raise an event,
`@Output()` works hand in hand with `EventEmitter`,
which is a class in `@angular/core` that you
use to emit custom events.

> When you use `@Output()`, be sure to edit these parts of your app:

Author: Done!

</div>

### In the child

This example features an `<input>` where a user can enter a value and click a `<button>` that raises an event. The `EventEmitter` then relays the data to the parent component.

First, be sure to import `Output` and `EventEmitter`
in the child component class:

```js
import { Output, EventEmitter } from '@angular/core';

```

Next, still in the child, decorate a property with `@Output()` in the component class.
The following example `@Output()` is called `newItemEvent` and its type is
`EventEmitter`, which means it's an event.

<code-example path="inputs-outputs/src/app/item-output/item-output.component.ts" region="item-output" header="src/app/item-output/item-output.component.ts" linenums="false">
</code-example>

The different parts of the above declaration are as follows:

* `@Output()`&mdash;a decorator function marking the property as a way for data to go from the child to the parent
* `newItemEvent`&mdash;the name of the `@Output()`

> * `EventEmitter<string>`&mdash;the `@Output()`'s type

Reviewer: Note, there's a [`no-inferrable-types`](https://palantir.github.io/tslint/rules/no-inferrable-types/) rule that forbids duplication in type signature and initializer, which is [by default enabled](https://github.com/angular/angular-cli/blob/30345c34995e1d683f6b96395635ecaf749cfbb1/packages/schematics/angular/workspace/files/tslint.json.template#L44-L47) in Angular CLI. I'm not sure whether doing this is right in example.

Author: Hm, @trotyl what should I change here for accuracy?

Reviewer: `@Output() newItemEvent: EventEmitter<string> = new EventEmitter<string>()` will violating this rule, should be `@Output() newItemEvent = new EventEmitter<string>()` where the type is automatically inferred.

<sub>It's hard to say violating a lint rule is something incorrect, I think it should be consistent across all examples and up to doc team to determine.</sub>

Author: Got it! Thanks :)

> * `new EventEmitter<string>()`&mdash;tells Angular to create a new event and that the data it emits is of type string. The type could be any type, such as `number`, `boolean`, and so on. For more information on `EventEmitter`, see the [EventEmitter API documentation](api/core/EventEmitter).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `new EventEmitter<string>()`&mdash;tells Angular to create a new event emitter and that the data it emits are of type string. The type could be any type, such as `number`, `boolean`, and so on. For more information on `EventEmitter`, see the [EventEmitter API documentation](api/core/EventEmitter).
```

Author: Changed.

Next, create an `addNewItem()` method in the same component class:

<code-example path="inputs-outputs/src/app/item-output/item-output.component.ts" region="item-output-class" header="src/app/item-output/item-output.component.ts" linenums="false">
</code-example>

The `addNewItem()` function uses the `@Output()`, `newItemEvent`,
to raise an event in which it emits the value the user
types into the `<input>`. In other words, when
the user clicks the add button in the UI, the child lets the parent know
about the event and gives that data to the parent.

#### In the child's template

> The child's template has two elements. The first is an HTML `<input>` with a

Reviewer: The `<input>` is wrapped into a `<label>`, which is mathematically three elements. The most simple change may be `two controls`?

Author: Fixed.
